# KeystoneJS v0.3.x to v0.4.0 Upgrade Guide

## Changes to express application and mounting

**WIP**

The mounting process has been rewritten for modularity and clarity. This may introduce some breaking changes if your app has been attaching the Keystone Admin UI to a nonstandard express app (i.e. not using `Keystone.start()`, but should make things simpler going forward.

### Changed

* `keystone.get('express session')` has been replaced by `keystone.expressSession`
* Session initialisation middleware is now executed before the body parser to allow for the Admin UI to include its own bodyParser implementation
* IP Restrictions middleware is now processed first, which means that static assets will now respect restrictions (previously this only restricted routes)
* `keystone.routes(fn)` has been replaced by `keystone.set('routes', fn)`
* the `routes` option supports both:
  * the legacy `function (app) {}` way of adding routes to the root express app
  * an `express.Router` instance

### Removed

* `keystone.static` has been removed (replacement TBA, see `admin/server`)
* `keystone.mount` has been removed (replaced by more granular methods, see `admin/server`)
* `keystone.bindEmailTestRoutes` and `keystone.set('email tests')` support (was this actually being used by anyone? let me know - @jedwatson)
* `keystone.set('email rules')` option has been removed; you should just use variables in your templates, rather than globally applied regular expressions.

## File handling Field Types

### New `File` field type

The new `File` field type, with the `FS`, `S3` and `Azure` storage adapters, replace the following field types (which are removed in 0.4) -

- `azureFile`
- `localFile`
- `localFiles`
- `s3File`

For usage instructions, see:
- [The Storage API](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/tree/master/lib/storage)
- [Local FileSystem Adapter](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/blob/master/lib/storage/adapters/fs)
- [Azure Storage Adapter](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone-storage-adapter-azure)
- [S3 Storage Adapter](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone-storage-adapter-s3)

For the full upgrade guide for File fields, see [File-Fields-Upgrade-Guide](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/wiki/File-Fields-Upgrade-Guide) in the KeystoneJS Wiki.

### CloudinaryImage

The `_upload` suffix is no longer required or supported when uploading files from an html form. Now simply provide the cloudinary field path as the name of file upload fields. For example:

```html
<!-- old -->
<input type="file" name="picture_upload" />
<!-- new -->
<input type="file" name="picture" />
```

### CloudinaryImages

When the `cloudinary folders` keystone option is set, in 0.3.x `CloudinaryImages` fields would incorrectly use the `cloudinary prefix` option's value as the first part of the folder path for fields that did not specify the `folder` option. This has been fixed; the folder for uploaded images now defaults to `this.list.path + '/' + this.path`

## Field API Changes

* **updateItem** is now asynchronous and need to pass a callback:
  * Before: `field.updateItem(item, data)`
  * After: `field.updateItem(item, data, function(err) {...})`

## Mongoose 4

The bundled version of Mongoose has been updated from 3.x to 4.x. Please review the [Migration Guide](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/migration.html) and [Release Notes](https://github.com/Automattic/mongoose/wiki/4.0-Release-Notes) for more information.

## `Keystone.Email`

`Keystone.Email` was completely rewritten as the standalone, well-tested `keystone-email` module, and requires it to be installed to work.

### Changed

* `new Email` now accepts a second argument as the options (e.g. to set the transport)
	```JS
	new Email('templatepath.ext', { transport: 'mailgun' });
	```
* The template locals are now passed in as the first, the options for send as the second and the callback as the third argument to `.send`

  ```JS
  new Email('templatepath.ext', { transport: 'mailgun' })
		.send(templateLocals, sendOptions, callback);
  ```

### Removed

These options, APIs or behaviours were removed with the rewrite to an external module.

* We no longer assume `email.jade` as the default filename, you now have to pass an entire filename to or set the `engine` in the `.Email` call

### Deprecated

All of these deprecations will continue to work throughout `v4.x`, though warnings will be added in a future minor release. **We highly encourage moving to the new APIs as soon as possible**, your apps will break in v5 otherwise!

* `keystone.set('email')` has been deprecated in favor of the `root` option (passed to the `.Email` call)
* The `templateExt` option was deprecated in favor of the `engine` option
* `keystone.set('transport')` has been deprecated in favor of setting `transport` in the `new Email()` options
* `keystone.set('mailgun api key')` and `keystone.set('mailgun domain')` have been deprecated in favor of passing the `apiKey` and `domain` option to the send options in `.send`
