# Upgrade Guide: 0.3 to 4.0

## Changes to express application and mounting

### WIP

The mounting process has been rewritten for modularity and clarity. This
may introduce some breaking changes if your app has been attaching the
Keystone Admin UI to a nonstandard express app (i.e. not using
`Keystone.start()`, but should make things simpler going forward.

### Changed

* `keystone.get('express session')` has been replaced by
`keystone.expressSession`
* Session initialisation middleware is now executed before the body
parser to allow for the Admin UI to include its own bodyParser
implementation
* IP Restrictions middleware is now processed first, which means that
static assets will now respect restrictions (previously this only
restricted routes)
* `keystone.routes(fn)` has been replaced by `keystone.set('routes',
fn)`
* the `routes` option supports both:
  * the legacy `function (app) {}` way of adding routes to the root
  express app
  * an `express.Router` instance

### Removed

* `keystone.static` has been removed (replacement TBA, see
`admin/server`)
* `keystone.mount` has been removed (replaced by more granular methods,
see `admin/server`)
* `keystone.bindEmailTestRoutes` and `keystone.set('email tests')`
support (was this actually being used by anyone? let me know -
@jedwatson)
* `keystone.set('email rules')` option has been removed; you should just
use variables in your templates, rather than globally applied regular
expressions.
* The `Types.CloudinaryImage` option `publicID: 'slug'` option has been
removed. It has been replaced by the generateFilename function.
Documentation for the new option can be found in
`fields/types/cloudinaryimage`

## UpdateHandler Changes

The UpdateHandler functionality has been completely rewritten to use the
new, generic `List.updateItem` method. While we have tried to preserve
backwards compatibility, there may be minor differences in functionality
and the format of messages returned.

The structure of error detail passed to the callback has changed, and
now matches the new API error format (see [the API
Spec](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/blob/master/admin/server/api/Readme.md))

If you are using the UpdateHandler please test your application
comprehensively when upgrading to 0.4 and report any problems you find
in the issues.

Specific changes include:

- The `callback` function now receives a single error argument. To retreive the created/updated object use: 

```JS
// To create a new item
var model = new MyModel.model();
MyModel.model().updateItem(model, data, options, function (err) {
	if (err) {
		// Error handling
	} else {
		var savedItem = MyModel.getData(model);
	}
});
```

- `options.validationMethods` is no longer supported, please apply any custom validation before calling `updateHandler.process()`
- `options.errorMessages` is no longer supported, as fields may now return different error conditions and replacing specific error detail with a simple string has the potential to be misleading and frustrating for users. If you want to show custom messages, please handle this on a case-by-case basis in your application.

The `flashErrors` option now supports the following values:

- `true` send all error messages to `req.flash`
- `"validation"` only send validation error messages to `req.flash`
- `"update"` only send update errors to `req.flash`

## File handling Field Types

### New `File` field type

The new `File` field type, with the `FS`, `S3` and `Azure` storage
adapters, replace the following field types (which are removed in 0.4) -

- `azureFile`
- `localFile`
- `localFiles`
- `s3File`

For usage instructions, see:
- [The Storage API](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/tree/master/lib/storage)
- [Local FileSystem Adapter](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/blob/master/lib/storage/adapters/fs)
- [Azure Storage Adapter](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone-storage-adapter-azure)
- [S3 Storage Adapter](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone-storage-adapter-s3)

For the full upgrade guide for File fields, see
[File-Fields-Upgrade-Guide](https://github.com/keystonejs/keystone/wiki/File-Fields-Upgrade-Guide)
in the KeystoneJS Wiki.

### CloudinaryImage

The `_upload` suffix is no longer required or supported when uploading
files from an html form. Now simply provide the cloudinary field path as
the name of file upload fields. For example:

```html
<!-- old -->
<input type="file" name="picture_upload" />
<!-- new -->
<input type="file" name="picture" />
```

### CloudinaryImages

When the `cloudinary folders` keystone option is set, in 0.3.x
`CloudinaryImages` fields would incorrectly use the `cloudinary prefix`
option's value as the first part of the folder path for fields that did
not specify the `folder` option. This has been fixed; the folder for
uploaded images now defaults to `this.list.path + '/' + this.path`

Explicit support for actions with `paths.action` (i.e. submitting a
`fieldPath_action` value) has been removed. To remove images from the
value, submit the new value for the field without the removed image
present.

The CloudinaryImages field no longer supports deleting removed images
from Cloudinary, this may be restored in a subsequent version.

Reordering images with `paths.order` (i.e. submitting a
`fieldPath_order` value) has also been removed. To sort images, submit
the full array of values in the correct order.

## Field API Changes

* **updateItem** is now asynchronous and need to pass a callback:
  * Before: `field.updateItem(item, data)`
  * After: `field.updateItem(item, data, function(err) {...})`

### Location fields

The `geocodeGoogle` option has been renamed to `enableImprove`.

## Mongoose 4

The bundled version of Mongoose has been updated from 3.x to 4.x. Please
review the [Migration Guide](http://mongoosejs.com/docs/migration.html)
and [Release
Notes](https://github.com/Automattic/mongoose/wiki/4.0-Release-Notes)
for more information.

## `Keystone.Email`

`Keystone.Email` was completely rewritten as the standalone, well-tested
`keystone-email` module, and requires it to be installed to work.

### Changed

* `new Email` now accepts a second argument as the options (e.g. to set the transport)

```javascript
new Email('templatepath.ext', { transport: 'mailgun' });
```

* The template locals are now passed in as the first, the options for
send as the second and the callback as the third argument to `.send`

```javascript
new Email('templatepath.ext', { transport: 'mailgun' })
  .send(templateLocals, sendOptions, callback);
```

### Removed

These options, APIs or behaviours were removed with the rewrite to an
external module.

* We no longer assume `email.jade` as the default filename, you now have
to pass an entire filename to or set the `engine` in the `.Email` call

### Deprecated

All of these deprecations will continue to work throughout `v4.x`,
though warnings will be added in a future minor release. **We highly
encourage moving to the new APIs as soon as possible**, your apps will
break in v5 otherwise!

* `keystone.set('email')` has been deprecated in favor of the `root`
option (passed to the `.Email` call)
* The `templateExt` option was deprecated in favor of the `engine`
option
* `keystone.set('transport')` has been deprecated in favor of setting
`transport` in the `new Email()` options
* `keystone.set('mailgun api key')` and `keystone.set('mailgun domain')`
have been deprecated in favor of passing the `apiKey` and `domain`
option to the send options in `.send`

## CSV Download

Keystone 0.3 had a feature where you could specify a custom `toCSV`
method on a list schema to control which values were included in the
CSV.

As the CSV Export has been completely rewritten and now supports the
same filter and fields options that the List view in the Admin UI does
(including being able to specify which fields are included in the CSV
from the Admin UI), the `toCSV` method has been replaced by a new
`getCSVData` method:

```javascript
User.schema.methods.getCSVData = function (data, options) {
  return {
    password: undefined,
    custom: { complex: true },
  };
};
```

Values returned by this method will be added to the CSV regardless of
the fields specified to be included. You have access to the fields in
`options.fields`. Additionally, you can set values to `undefined` to
remove them from the csv if they were included.

The current User, if there is one, is provided in `options.user`.

## New Features

### toCSV method on Fields

You can now also specify a per-field `toCSV` transform. Provide a
function to return a custom value for the field if it is specified in
`options.fields`:

```javascript
User.add({
  email: { type: Types.Email, toCSV: function (field, options) {
    return this.id === options.user.id ? 'Your email address' : this.email;
  }}
})
```

The `this` scope will be the document being serialised to CSV format.
The `field` argument is the field definition, and the `options` argument
contains the options passed to `getCSVData` (see above).

For field types that store an object, you can instead provide a list or
array of keys to include in the CSV data:

```javascript
User.add({
  address: { type: Types.Location, toCSV: 'suburb, postcode' }
})
```

### Automatic flattening of complex values

Objects will be flattened to multiple columns, with each key being
appended to the field path using camelCase.

So, for example, the following data from a `File` field with the path
`attachment`:

```javascript
{
  id: '56dd3f1a51cb31100cf08457',
  attachment: {
    filename: 'photo.jpg',
    size: 83452
  }
}
```

Will be added to the CSV in two columns:

```sh
id,attachmentFilename,attachmentFilesize
56dd3f1a51cb31100cf08457,photo.jpg,83452
```

## Removed Options

The `csv expanded` keystone option has been deprecated. Relationship
fields will always be expanded into `fieldName`, `fieldId` columns by
default.


## Changed Dependencies

### Breaking Fixes

#### Relationship Field Updates

Relationship fields had a bug in 0.3.x and 4.0.0 betas pre-beta.6 where `undefined` values passed to `List.updateItem` would be persisted to the database for `{ many: true }` fields.

This has been fixed, so that incoming `undefined` values are ignored, which is consistent with all other field types except `Boolean`.

### Jade

Keystone 3 included `jade` as a dependency; this meant your project may
have been able to use jade as the view engine without depending on it
explicitly. Jade has now been removed from Keystone, so if you're using
it you will need to explicitly add it to your `package.json`.

### Underscore

Keystone 3 included `underscore` as a dependency; this was utilised by
the generator, which should have added an explicit dependency when
generating `package.json` files. Unfortunately it didn't, which means
your project may expect underscore to be available and it won't be.

If you get the following error when starting a project with keystone 4:

```sh
Error: Cannot find module 'underscore'
```

Run the following command in your project's root folder to resolve it:

```sh
npm install --save underscore
```
